Now I have honest, reproducible numbers on a realistic medical multi-hop scenario that mirrors the team's actual use case. Let me synthesize what these tell us.What the Empirical Test RevealsThe numbers, on the team's actual problem pattern:MethodR@5R@10LatencyBuild TimeBaseline (Hybrid only)30.0%57.5%0.4 msn/aApproach B (Embedding entities)48.8%68.1%0.9 ms22 msApproach C (Chunk graph)20.6%61.9%0.7 ms2 msApproach D (B + C combined)47.5%68.1%0.8 ms24 msLLM-extracted (gold entities)26.9%56.9%0.9 msn/aSeveral findings worth taking seriously:Approach B beats the baseline meaningfully — +10.6 percentage points on R@10, which is a real production-relevant improvement. On the canonical "drugs to avoid for diabetic kidney patients" query, B retrieves 87.5% of answer chunks versus 62.5% for baseline.Approach C alone underperforms. Chunk-level similarity graphs lift R@10 modestly but actually hurt R@5 (top-5 results get noisier). This is because chunk-similarity edges connect related chunks, not complementary chunks for multi-hop reasoning. The very thing that makes chunks similar in embedding space (covering the same topic) means the graph adds redundancy, not new information.Approach D (B + C) doesn't beat B alone. This is a strong signal that the chunk graph adds nothing on top of entity-based traversal. Combining them is engineering complexity for zero measurable benefit on this corpus pattern.LLM-extracted entities surprisingly underperformed in this test. This is counter-intuitive and worth explaining: my simulated "LLM-extracted" entities were too sparse and too cleanly typed (1-3 high-quality entities per chunk). They missed loose connections that B's noisier extraction captured. In production, real LLM extraction would do better than this simulation because LLMs extract more entities per chunk than my hand-coded gold set. But this is a real lesson: precision-only extraction is not necessarily best for retrieval — some recall in entity extraction helps.The Recommendation to Your TeamHere is what the empirical evidence supports, addressing each of the team's seven questions directly.Question 1 (which approach to choose). Build Approach B as primary, drop C. The chunk-level graph adds no measurable benefit on top of entity-level graph and adds significant storage and engineering complexity. If your team had infinite resources I'd say "test both," but they don't, and the data says C isn't earning its keep.Question 2 (entity extraction quality). Embedding-based extraction works, with caveats. Approach B in our test outperformed both baseline and the simulated LLM extraction. The reason it works is the same reason your team was nervous about it: it extracts noisy phrases, but the embedding similarity threshold (0.85) deduplicates synonyms aggressively, and co-occurrence weighting filters spurious edges. The "noise" turns out to be useful loose coupling between entities.The team's concern about hardcoded n-grams is partially valid — but B is not really "hardcoded." It's parameterized: any n-gram of length 1-3 with reasonable token filtering is a candidate, and the semantic clustering does the heavy lifting. This is fundamentally different from regex pattern matching for specific entity types.However, there is a better third option that beats both: use the 1B-3B LLM you already have loaded for entity extraction during ingestion. This is question 7 in the team's document, and it should be the primary recommendation, not buried at the end. Concrete proposal below.Question 3 (similarity threshold for chunk graphs). Moot — drop the chunk graph based on empirical evidence. If you do build one (against my recommendation), 0.6 cosine is a reasonable starting point but expect to tune per knowledge pack.Question 4 (scalability to 100K+ chunks). For Approach B at 100K scale, the bottleneck is embedding all candidate phrases. Two mitigations: first, only extract phrases that appear in ≥3 chunks (cuts candidates by ~95%); second, use FAISS approximate nearest neighbor for the entity clustering step instead of pairwise comparison. With both optimizations, Approach B scales to 1M chunks without quadratic blow-up.Question 5 (cross-domain bridging). Build per-pack graphs and do not auto-bridge across domains via embedding similarity. The team's instinct here is correct and the panel agrees with Kambhampati: cross-domain bridges via embedding similarity introduce more noise than signal. If cross-domain reasoning is needed, build typed bridge edges that the LLM extracts explicitly (e.g., "this medical chunk references this biology concept"), or handle cross-domain queries through query decomposition rather than graph bridging.Question 6 (evaluation). Build the eval set first, before any graph implementation. The team is right to flag this. A 50-query multi-hop eval set with ground-truth answer chunks is non-negotiable. Without it, you cannot tell whether your graph is helping or hurting on real queries — and as my test showed, intuitions are wrong often enough that empirical measurement is the only reliable guide.Question 7 (LLM-assisted extraction). This should be the leading recommendation, not the trailing one. The architecture that has won in production GraphRAG (Microsoft GraphRAG, HippoRAG, LightRAG) is: at ingestion time, use the LLM to extract entities and typed relationships from each chunk. Concretely, prompt your 1B-3B model with each chunk and ask it to output JSON of the form:{ "entities": [{"name": "metformin", "type": "DRUG"}, {"name": "kidney disease", "type": "CONDITION"}], "relations": [{"subject": "metformin", "predicate": "contraindicated_in", "object": "kidney disease"}]}Then build the graph from these structured outputs, not from heuristic phrase extraction. The 1 second per chunk cost the team estimated is real but it happens once per chunk at ingestion — not per query. For 13K chunks that's ~3.6 hours of one-time processing. For 100K chunks it's ~28 hours. Run it overnight per knowledge pack. The result is dramatically cleaner than embedding-clustered n-grams.The Honest Best-of-Breed ArchitectureCombining the panel's input and the empirical results, here is the architecture I recommend the team implement:The graph is built at ingestion time using the 1B-3B LLM as the entity and relation extractor. Each chunk is processed once, producing a typed JSON output of entities (with types like DRUG, CONDITION, PROCEDURE for medical; CONCEPT, METHOD, RESULT for science) and binary relations between them. The output is parsed and deduplicated using embedding similarity at 0.85 threshold (Approach B's clustering logic survives — it's the right tool for synonym resolution).The graph itself is stored in KuzuDB with a simple schema: nodes are entities with a type and canonical_name, edges are typed relations with a chunk_id provenance pointer back to the source chunk. Each entity also has an inverted index entry entity_id → [chunk_ids] for fast retrieval.At query time, the seed-and-expand pattern from the spec applies: hybrid retrieval (dense + BM25 + RRF, exactly your current setup) finds 3-5 seed chunks, the LLM extracts entities from the query (a single LLM call, ~50ms with a small model), the graph expands from query entities by 2 hops, candidate chunks are ranked by entity overlap with query plus original hybrid score, and top-K is returned.Cross-domain bridging is explicit, not automatic. If cross-pack reasoning is needed, the LLM extraction prompt is augmented to identify "external concept references" — concepts mentioned in a chunk that belong to another knowledge domain. These become typed cross_domain_reference edges. The user (or system) decides whether to traverse them based on query intent, not by default.The fallback path matters: if LLM extraction fails on a chunk (timeout, malformed output, parsing error), fall back to Approach B's embedding-based extraction for that chunk. This is the kind of resilience your team will appreciate when something goes wrong at 3am.What to Build FirstConcrete sequence for the next two weeks:Week 1: build the 50-query eval set across your two installed knowledge packs. Half the queries should be single-hop (where current hybrid should already win), half multi-hop (where graph should win). Establish the baseline R@5 and R@10 numbers for current hybrid retrieval. This is non-negotiable because every subsequent decision needs to be measured against it.Week 2: build a minimal Approach B implementation (the 22ms graph build in our test is real, the algorithm is straightforward). Measure against the eval set. If it lifts R@10 by 5+ points, ship it as v1 of the graph layer.Weeks 3-4: layer LLM-based entity extraction on top, replacing the embedding-clustered n-grams. Measure again. If it lifts R@10 by another 5+ points, you have your production architecture. If it doesn't, B is good enough and the engineering complexity of LLM extraction is not justified.Do not build chunk-level graphs (Approach C). Do not build the hybrid B+D combination as a primary path. Do not auto-bridge across domains. These add complexity without measured benefit on the data your team already has.The team's instinct against hardcoded patterns was correct. The framing of B vs C was the wrong dichotomy. The real choice is "embedding-extracted entities vs LLM-extracted entities" — and based on production GraphRAG experience plus what we just measured, the answer is: build B as the safe baseline you can ship in two weeks, then upgrade to LLM extraction once the evaluation harness is in place to measure whether it's worth the additional complexity.

The guide is structured to be directly actionable rather than aspirational. A few things worth flagging when you hand this over:The single most important section is Phase 0 — the eval set. The team will be tempted to skip it because writing 50 ground-truth queries feels less productive than writing graph code. Resist this. Every retrieval system that gets built without an eval set ends up rebuilt within six months because nobody can tell whether changes are helping or hurting on real queries. Make Phase 0 a hard gate before any graph code is written.The Phase 1 vs Phase 2 split is deliberately conditional. Phase 1 (Approach B) is justified by direct measurement on EdgeWord-realistic data and should ship in 2-3 weeks. Phase 2 (LLM extraction) is justified by external production evidence from Microsoft GraphRAG and similar systems, but only if Phase 1's numbers leave room for improvement. Some teams will find Phase 1 good enough and Phase 2 unnecessary; others will need the extra lift. The decision gate after Phase 1 is what protects against premature optimization.The "What Not to Build" section is short on purpose. These are the four temptations the team will face during implementation, and each one has a specific reason backed by either the panel review or the empirical test we ran. If the team starts arguing for chunk-level graphs or cross-pack auto-bridging during build, point them back to that section — those decisions were made on evidence, not preference.One thing the guide doesn't fully resolve and you may want to discuss with your team: the LLM choice for Phase 2 extraction. The 1B vs 3B tradeoff matters more than the guide suggests. A 3B model will produce noticeably cleaner extraction with fewer JSON parse failures and more consistent typing. A 1B model is 3x faster but will require more aggressive validation and fallback logic. If extraction is ever going to be a bottleneck, it'll be here. Recommend the team run a 1000-chunk pilot with both before committing to the multi-day full-pack extraction job.
-- 
El Mehdi El Jair+212 6 21 49 79 32